## Changelog
- [x] I implemented lasso for feature selection. (Use lasso regression instead of PCA for dimensionality reduction. Lasso performs **feature selection**, so it would be interesting from an interpretability standpoint to see which features in the BERT embeddings are most important for predicting the artist's location.)
- [x] Added hierarchical classification. (Regression vs. Classification: Another thing I should do is stop framing this as a continuous regression problem and instead frame it as a classification problem. I should bin the latitude and longitude into regions (East Coast, West Coast, Midwest, South) and then predict which region the rapper is from. This would be more realistic since the rappers are from discrete regions, not continuous points on a map, lmao. Although there's also the consideration that some cities or states could be classes of their own, like how Atlanta and Texas are both in the South, but they have distinct rap scenes. So I should think about how to handle that, too. Maybe by using a **hierarchical classification** model or something. Also don't forget Drake, who's from Canada, which throws a wrench in my plans (fuckin BBL Drizzy).)
- [x] BERT tokenizes everything all right. (Non-words: A lot of rap is not easily tokenizable; some words are slang or are spelled in non-standard ways, especially in lyrics (e.g. contractions like "cruisin'" and shit like "Doo-doo-d-doo, diggy-doo, yo"). I need to check that the BERT tokenizer can handle this phraseology.)
- [x] I assigned each rapper to the city he is most known for. (Non-issue: I was concerned that for rappers who moved around during their careers, I would have to assign them to multiple cities. But I realized that most rappers only started their careers in one city, so I can just assign them to that city. I need to make sure I'm consistent about this; I think I will assign rappers to the city where they are most known for their work and/or where they grew up.)
- [x] I cleaned the data and added preprocessingn steps in `prepare.py`. (I don't remember if I actually manually cleaned the data. I know some of the text files contained weird stuff like Japanese characters. I need to go make sure I fixed that. Also, some of them contain words like "Verse 1" and "Chorus" and others don't, so that could be a confounding factor. I gotta remove those. Basically I need to more carefully clean the data.)
- [x] I put both Tupacs in California. (The Kaggle dataset contains two different files for Tupac. I originally thought that one was from before he moved to California and the other was after, but now I'm pretty sure they are just two different compilations of his lyrics. I need to combine these into a single file. Oops.)
- [x] I checked and ChatGPT got the locations right. (I didn't actually check if ChatGPT got the locations right. I need to go through and make sure the city assignments are correct.)
